For nine days in the spring of 1940. This beach was the last refuge for hundreds of thousands of British soldiers
Trapped by Hitler's forces and bombed by German aircraft there seemed no escape
Out that nobody's gonna get out of this they can't get the download of us
Offshore the Royal Navy and a flotilla of little ships would pull off the most audacious rescue in British history
But while the little ships passed into legend the RAF were cast as villains
At Dunkirk the RAF was absolutely detested by the Army and the Navy
Britain's fighter pilots were accused of failing in their duty Dunkirk was seen as the RAF spora Stour
Some of the army were annoyed because there were no Spitfires and hurricanes around I can't say that I saw any other
Newly declassified wartime files are rewriting the history of Britain's miracle escape
For the first time since World War two, we're actually a lay off to see what's inside them
They overturn a long-standing slur on the RAF
Revealing a story of heroic sacrifice in the skies over dunker
This beach is a popular summer playground on the Belgian coast enjoyed by young families throughout the year
But today the police and the belgian army have created an exclusion zone that reaches far out to sea
And this is why they are here
- deadly Second World War shells will discover just a few feet beneath the sand
The discovery of wartime shells on this beach is far from unusual
Seven decades ago this stretch of sand witnessed intense air attacks on soldiers unable to defend themselves
The bomb squad carefully attached plastic explosives
The shells are every bit as lethal today as they were over 70 years ago
To limit the blast damage before detonation they ribéry the shells deep in the sand
Okay
But in the spring of 1940 this coastline was packed with men trapped on the evacuation beaches
This is a photograph taken at the time of soldiers under attack from German aircraft
Bullets bombs and shells were falling relentlessly on hundreds of thousands of British and French troops
The onslaught from the German air force the Luftwaffe seemed never-ending
They used to come over every half-hour during daylight your second watch today
How did the British find themselves in such a perilous position
When Germany invaded Poland in 1939 the British sent 150,000 troops into France
Called the British Expeditionary Force or BEF they were intended to act as a deterrent to further aggression
But on the 10th of May 1940 Hitler launched his blitzkrieg or lightning war
Hitler's troops supported by planes charged through Belgium and the Netherlands
As the British and French forces rushed to meet them head-on the German army took everyone by surprise
Using fast moving tanks supported by bombers
The Germans launched an even more powerful attack through the supposedly impenetrable Ardennes Forest
Pushing the British and French back toward the coast
When we got there the hole that dunker was on par with
This great all of smoke going up from the oil tanks
Our moment of walls were falling down
And to continual noise of the look off of loving the dogs we didn't hang about
Sartre seeing her
As the British army was retreating one Belgian civilian documented the chaos as the bombs fell around him
My uncle's father made these photographs in 1940 may 1940s
So he had his own camera and he was taking photographs all this was going on his camera or family
This have never been published before
Photographs from the Dunkirk evacuation are extremely rare
The thing that fascinates me is that these show the British Army in action. That was a knocked out truck
Historian Paul Reid has studied Dunkirk extensively
He's come to the home of Christoph to Kusum akka to see a collection of photos never seen before
Some of them taken moments after a Luftwaffe attack. I
Can see part of the windows blown out here and this is all damaged growth and this trucks partially destroyed
So this is obviously a really dangerous place to be and there's civilians moving around
There's some people just standing on the street corner here
it makes the hair stand up on the back of my leg to be honest with you and
Just amazing photographs
These show young men whose lives have been cut tragically short
Firm believer that people need to see these photographs and here these guys are just lying like broken toys
On the floor alongside their motorbike and some of their vehicles
I can remember for the first time smelling death
It was undescribable and it was this smell of rotting corpses
They had to walk through Dunkirk the smell or
Terrible, what was Pizza body's been laying there for some considerable time?
Well, that's a Tommy's helmet there, I think those two autonomous ailments
So it's a mixed grave of French and and British soldiers just buried in the sand quite close to the edge of the beach
And this marks the final resting place of the men trying to get off the beaches at Dunkirk
Journey down for these lights. Yep
With casualty numbers rising the troops were starting to wonder why they were left unprotected
They were kicking up how about where's our plane, you know when we were
under such
Terrible stress with the endless attacks. We were getting from the earth
Some of the army were annoyed because there were no Spitfires and hurricanes around I
Can't say that I saw any other
For the men on the ground death or capture seemed inevitable when something extraordinary happened
The Germans suddenly stopped
On the 23rd of May the German General von Rundstedt halted the Panzer divisions most of the generals under him
Really couldn't understand why he was doing that. They've made this
Incredible move towards the coast. I mean, it's absolutely unprecedented. They they've moved so fast
Historian Joshua Levine has spent years studying Dunkirk and particularly the halt order decision
He believes that it was made by Hitler and it was his deputy Hermann Goering --zz idea
Now Goering was a commander in chief of the Luftwaffe and what he said to Hitler don't leave this to the generals
Instead. Let me do it. Let the look far for do it. The Luftwaffe is Nazi
It supports you you will get the glory if we finish off the BEF
For a while Goering x' boasts that the Luftwaffe could finish off the british army looked as though it might succeed
You heard the aircraft come over and you saw them, I mean the the whole length of the beach was people on it
And though they were dive-bombing the kurma and they couldn't miss so there was some
Sacrifice every time there was an air ride
The Luftwaffe most feared weapon was the Stuka dive-bomber
At buzzer
noise Assad
I hated them
I used to make a terrible screeching noise coming out was a psychological loving detroit Ephraim. Knew who she did
Diving down with this awful to boiling Sun attached lease to decide sirens
They machined on the slot
You just thought well am I lucky I am I not nothing
It now appeared that the skies have been handed over to the stickers and the Messerschmitts
And the men in the firing line were beginning to ask
Where were the RAF I?
Got so damn
Scared I suppose and fed up
I thought Alfred crocheted let the next one be mine because I can't stake us any longer and let's get it over and done
I'm not gonna get out of this because it seemed
inescapable and yet miraculously
Despite the apparent absence of the RAF men were escaping
Off shore and our murder of ships was gathering to come and save them
It was a desperate attempt to rescue at least some of the fleeing army
At the very beginning Churchill estimated that with luck something like 30,000 people would get off
Things didn't look good for the British Expeditionary Force things. Look very very bleak indeed
Day after day the bombardment continued while the soldiers made their escape
But even when they did manage to get away catastrophe awaited me and for some there would be no going home
May 1940
The Royal Navy has sent a flotilla of ships from Britain to rescue the hundreds of thousands of troops trapped on the Dunkirk beaches
It will become known as the miracle of Dunkirk, aha
The feeling is indescribable. I don't Amitha. I'm gonna make it
But realizing an escape plan had been hatched
the Luftwaffe started bombing Dunkirk Harbor where the evacuation fleet was heading
So the troops were ordered to the beaches to the east of the town
But that left a major problem the gently shelving beaches were unsuitable for rescue
It was impossible for the big ships to reach the soldiers
There was only one way to get to the boats waiting offshore and it was fraught with danger
When we see the iconic images of men on beaches like this
We do see we're almost orderly queues of men going out to the ships going out to the point
They can swim out to a vessel and get away
The process of getting 500 men out to the waiting ships took up to eight hours
They desperately needed to speed things up
The roads to Dunkirk were littered with abandoned lorries now of no value to the army
However, when driven onto the sand at low tide they were to become priceless
So they came up with the idea of a lorry pier where they drive lorries onto the beach
And we've got a captured German photo here showing such a lorry pier
They drive the lorries onto the beach line them up side by side front of the lorry here
Really lorry here and they put planking on the top
So the planking enabled them to walk across the ruse of the lorries get down there quickly a high tide
The water would be lapping up both sides
And there'll be lots little boats available
To them ferry them from the far end of the lorry pier out to sea to the bigger boats
With the halt order over the German troops were once again on the advance
It would take them no more than a day and a half before they over round the beaches
The euro an hour till he had moved up man had started being out the drop shells on the beach
That was a time to get out
All the while they were still being targeted from the air
it's just so allowing the same and
Pray, I don't think there were many atheists dunker the mark being ostrich
Offshore the Navy was fighting back, but they had to find a way of speeding up the evacuation
And a Dunkirk Harbor they found it
A mile long cause wave just one yard wide and never meant for mooring ships
It was called the Dunkirk move
And the idea would turn out to be a stroke of genius
Of all the snap decisions that were that were made on the spot for me
That is the greatest decision the idea to call this great big breakwater into service as something it was never meant to be
Very quickly, they were loading thousands of men onto the ship's now moored alongside the breakwater
One of the myths of Dunkirk was that most of the soldiers were taken off the beaches by the little ships when the reality was
2/3 escaped from the MOL
Machine and gig and incursion and it didn't take long before the Luftwaffe realized what the British were up to
Once again and
Apparently unhindered by the RAF fighters the huncles and the stickers targeted the Dunkirk mo and the ships moored alongside it
But an escape from the mole was no guarantee of safety
12 miles into the English Channel
on the night of the 29th of May
The soldiers aboard the destroyer HMS wakeful thought they were safe
But the destroyers suffered one of the most prolonged aerial bombardments of the evacuation
Crippled by dioramas. She was eventually finished off by torpedoes
Just hours from home
over six hundred men were to perish
And wait for was basically broken in half three. She broke into two pieces and
What you were left with had you been there what you would have seen were two ends of the ship poking out of the water
The upshot of that was that when the ship went down these people basically didn't have a chance and they drowned almost immediately
It was one soldier who'd been on deck having a cigarette he got away all the rest would drown
One of the reasons that the evacuation of Dunkirk has resonated down the decades
Is that the Navy rescue was joined by a flotilla of privately owned vessels?
The so called little ships
Manned by civilian sailors desperate to do their bit
These are the last survivors of the 700 little ships which helped in the evacuation
For many they're a poignant reminder of the Dunkirk miracle
But not all the civilian vessels did make it back home and
Today at very low tides. It is still possible to find evidence of one ships tragic story
So the captain brought it in he actually beached it yeah and so this is where it's sat ever since then yes
Joshua Levine is with local historian, Johan salmon
Winter storms and unusually low spring tides have revealed evidence of the bravery of the little ships
This is all that's left of the Thames paddle steamer the crested eagle
So this is the Bell this is the very front the very front this this here is what would have broken the water here
Yeah, Rob Lord, I see
Before the war the crested eagle took day-trippers from Tower Bridge in London to Southend pier on the Essex coast
She was used to carrying a full complement of passengers
So is it unusual then to get this view of it? Yeah that's abnormal today. So this is as clear as it is
On the 29th of May 1940
It was not day trippers
But exhausted british soldiers that the crested eagles captain picked up from the MOL at Dunkirk a few miles away
At about 6 o'clock in the evening it left them all
Very much, you know, we're not far from home. That's the point, you know these ships
Were not far away from getting all the troops back to places like Dover and Ramsgate
Every inch of the paddle steamer was packed with men, but her journey was to be short-lived
With no apparent air cover the crested eagle was easy prey for the Stuka dive-bombers
They came down almost vertically
And then they let go of their bomb and had a very low altitude
And bear in mind that a ship like crested eagle left a very large weight
It was a very clear obvious target for the stupid
And they hit it
At least four bombs hit him
And there's an account from a sailor who was on board and
This sailor talks about a blazing Inferno
He said he saw our people
Walking up and down and their faces have been blasted off and their faces were melting and their arms were melting
he said he saw a
Left tenant and the only way you could recognize this man was was from the emblem on his steel helmet
And
From that moment on it was clear that
Crested eagle wasn't going to survive but what the captain managed to do amazingly was to bring it into Shore and Annie beached it
which is why we still have it here and on an
Extraordinary day like today when we have this spring tide we can see so much of it
These pictures of the crested eagle were taken by a German photographer in 1940
They show the devastating results of the Luftwaffe attack
It is thought that 300 men died on the paddle steamer that day
The Allies would lose over 230 ships at Dunkirk
Many of the wrecks littering the beaches bore the deep scars inflicted by the German bombers
It seemed that Goering Luftwaffe was doing its job
And the men on the beaches were still asking where were the RAF
At Dunkirk the RAF was
Absolutely detested by the Army and the Navy and the reason it was detested was because there was this idea
From both that the RAF had simply not been there to defend them from the Luftwaffe because lift-off are attacking
constantly and it seemed
To the soldiers and sailors, but the RAF was doing nothing to defend them
But newly released files tell a different story
Far from being absent unseen from the beaches the RAF were laying the foundations for the Dunkirk miracle
As the Navy and the little ships were evacuating soldiers from Dunkirk
Questions were asked of the RAF. Where were they? Why had they abandon the men to the Luftwaffe?
Resentment soon turned to anger
Wireless operator Arthur Taylor was told to get out of his RAF uniform if he wanted to escape
This left Herman came up to me and he said right tell your shoes off put some gum boots on
Take your jacket off and put this black Mackintosh on
Take your hat off and put a 10 out. I
Don't want you to be recognized as our as our RAF
And that's how I got on the boat
The allegations that the RAF had played no part in the evacuation have never really gone away
But is it justified
While we're searching his book Joshua Levine has discovered a remarkable recording made by a Dunkirk fighter pilot
accession number 106
The recording was made by Squadron Leader Tony Barclay who recalls the ill feeling against him and his fellow Airmen
British soldiers were very
antagonistic towards the Air Force
Not me personally, but I heard about it. I
Mean nobody out arrow said you son of a bitch, you know
whether his bloody wings fuller you let us down at danke, but it was it was a very
common experience with pilot pilot
Squadron Leader Bartlett died in 2001
So Joshua has come to the RAF Club in London to meet his widow Vicky who still has her husband's letters and logbook from Dunkirk
Hello
Hello, it's a pleasure to meet you great to see you thank you very much for coming all this way
Like most RAF fighter pilots at the time
May 1940 was the first occasion the 21 year old Tony Bartley had been in action
He had talked to be about Dunkirk and he had mentioned how they were in
you know really bad odor with the
army, and
What do you think he meant by that was what was he?
what was he trying to explain what he was trying to explain that the
Army, thought that the RAF hadn't done anything and weren't there for them and weren't protecting them
Viki Barclay has brought along a letter written by her husband
Which shows the true extent of the animosity between the troops and his fellow pilots at the time?
We heard from Pete Cazenove
One of our squadron who was shot down and captured at Dunkirk. He tried to get on three destroyers, but was turned off each one
The Navy said that all accommodation was reserved for the army and that the Air Force could go F themselves
Then there's another bit about Ireland dear who was another one who was shot down that day
another friend of mine
Was in the same predicament
But he knocked out the Navy a man who tried to stop him and got himself aboard
He was middleweight champion of the RAF a New Zealander and I guess the others thought it best to leave him alone
This is extraordinary, I mean it is astonishing I mean that is daddy's is a crime actually to do that
But Tony Bartley's logbook
Detailing the very first day 92 squadron went into action over France
Suggests the RAF were in the thick of it
So this is written by your judgement by him
Yes in his notebook and it's on the 23rd of May. Mm-hmm, and it says patrol
Encountered 12 any one? Oh nine ten shot down
By squadron fat Liam and killed patrol encountered about 50m
e1s
bombers
So many bullets flying around
Hello sky was just bullets flying everywhere. I don't hardly be shot out in the damage
You just went on until you ran out of ammunition
Missing butl Gilles clich paddy wounded
Cazenove missing
patrol encountered dawnia's 17 shot down in
scene one parachute escape I
Mean that was all that day. I got hit 18 times in the morning to have times near afternoon
But I thought this is par for the course
The losses suffered by Bartley's squadron that day were high
Shows anything it's that the RAF was in the thick of the fight, but they were they were absolutely
Tony Barclays vivid accounts fly in the face of the soldiers claims that the RAF were absent at Dunkirk
Now at the National Archives in London
RAF files kept closed for seven decades have just been released and they seemed to support Barclays claims
They paint the most accurate picture yet of what was happening in the skies over Dunkirk
There are roughly 200 files that cover the Dunkirk period
From 26th of May II to the 2nd of June. So the main period of lifting men off the beaches
The Dunkirk casualty files are part of a larger group of RAF records opened each time an airman failed to return from a mission
Historian Simon Perry has studied the documents in forensic detail
and
He's been left in no doubt that the soldiers had simply got it wrong
The RAF were given a hard time immediately after Dunkirk
But it's completely
Unjustified. It's really a few of
The poor sods are on the beach
waiting to be lifted off and
It was a view born more of ignorance. They before they could even reach the soldiers on the beaches and
There was another reason
The battles were being fought at great height
At four or five miles above them and there's no way that the troops on the beach could see what the RAF were doing
Simon's research from the files also reveals that huge numbers of RAF planes were being lost out at sea
As pilots tried to stop the Luftwaffe bombing the ships and the beaches
The fact that the soldiers didn't see the Spitfires and hurricanes whizzing around their heads
Is immaterial but nevertheless they had a view I didn't see them. They weren't in my eye sight
And so you have these attacks on them saying well, where was the bloody RAF?
The files show that of the start of the Blitzkrieg
The RAF was suffering unsustainable losses in their attempts to hold back the German army
Then something remarkable happened somehow the RAF turned the tide
A clue to this dramatic transformation can be found in the casualty file belonging to Squadron Leader Jeffrey Stevenson
Remarkably Stevenson squadron of just twelve RAF fighters sawed off an attack force of fifty German aircraft
The reason behind this outstanding performance was the aircraft Stephenson was flying that day
the Marquand Supermarine Spitfire
This was the first time the Spitfire had faced the Luftwaffe and it would go on to change the course of the Second World War
Unlike the hurricane which had been in France since the start of the conflict in May 1940. The Spitfire was completely untested
Stevenson Spitfire was eventually shot down over France, but Dunkirk was not to be its final resting place
Hello John don't pretend you're working
Steve Vizard and John remain have both spent a lifetime restoring second world war fighter planes
It was from duxford aerodrome in Cambridgeshire that Geoffrey Stephenson and his squadron of Spitfires were based in May 1940
And this is the very Spitfire he flew over Dunkirk
So here she Steve in three two, double like yeah
Jeffrey Stevenson fresh from Dunkirk fresh from Duncan and she's exactly the same markings nailers
Yeah, she was then was exactly there for the last detail
Squadron Leader Stevenson was in action near dunkirk on May the 26th 1940 when his Spitfire
N32, double-o was shot down in combat
And of course this airplane was lost with one bullet going through one of these pipes and
Cause and that was enough to overheat over heat and he then knew he wasn't going to get back to England
So that's why he belied the aeroplane down on the beach
Geoffrey Stephenson survived the crash and for a while in the summer of 1940 his Spitfire
Became something of a tourist attraction for the German soldiers now occupying France
It eventually disappeared beneath the sand and the sea
In 1986
Stephenson's aircraft was recovered, but it would take almost 30 years before the Spitfire was fully restored
Then you can actually see the guns the breech is up there current you. Yeah, you can't look in there there in that
Armed with eight machine guns set in the Spitfires revolutionary elliptical wings the mark one was built for high-speed maneuvers
Britain's newest fighter could out match any German plane
Especially when tweaked with a few personal touches
The early aeroplanes that they didn't have rearview mirrors at all
So once they started to get into combat
they realized that they needed a mirror and so before they could start putting them on the aeroplanes in production all the
Pilots started running around producing their own mirrors and this was Jeffrey's version of it, and it was the mirror from his mg
For the Spitfire pilots, like jeffrey stevenson and tony botti dunkirk was the first time they would go into battle
Here they would face german airman who already had combat experience in poland as well as spain
And from the start the Spitfire pilots began to make a difference you see what we did at danke we turned them back
Although we're only 12, you know, we used to molest them and they just turn around and then just take off
The Dunkirk miracle owed as much to the brilliance of the RAF as it did to the Navy and the little ships
But it was the Spitfire and it's untested pilots who really made it possible
The lessons they learned at Dunkirk would prove invaluable
Because the Germans were not about to stop at the English Channel and
The Spitfires would fly into legend
By the 4th of June 1940 the Dunkirk evacuation was over and for the soldiers of the BEF who had managed to get away
It was a short journey across the English Channel and a glorious homecoming
Could feel the boat going up and down with the waves I
Was so tired. I
fell asleep next
Thing I knew someone was shaking me saying wake up we're coming into Folkston
Over the course of nine days almost 340 thousand troops were safely evacuated from Dunkirk
Back in England, they were greeted with a hero's welcome
Waitin on the case over all these
wvs
with cakes and tea and that because well
I've been shot late all my battle dress
There was a bit blood stains and all these ladies made a grab for me to take care of their wounded hero
And it was him all dying from them ladies and any bloody cuts
Most would return to barracks
While the fortunate would go home to their families
they put me on a train Phil my father lived and
I got under the gun trained and it gave me a salute see bridges
And my usual ticket collector said welcome home, sir. We thought you was lost
I
Don't understand and they welcomed us as heroes
They capped us and cheered us. I simply didn't understand him. I
Mean the British can turn of the defeat into a victory
Winston Churchill described Dunkirk as a miracle of deliverance
He had expected to report the greatest military disaster in Britain's history
At the beginning Churchill had estimated that as few as 20 thousand troops would get away
And yet in the end the Royal Navy would rescue over a third of a million soldiers
But many thousands would not make it home and
They are commemorated here at the British War Cemetery on the outskirts of Dunkirk. I
Think it's absolutely fair to say that Dunkirk was a miracle. It was a miracle of deliverance in the way Churchill spoke about it
Dunkirk is an incredibly important event because if the British Expeditionary Force had been taken prisoner
The likelihood is that Britain would have had to surrender if Britain had surrendered the war would have been over at that point
The pilots of RAF Fighter Command had played their part in keeping Britain in the war and the Luftwaffe knew it too
Kesselring the general in charge of the German air force at Dunkirk
Acknowledged that in the end. It was the Spitfire which enabled the British to evacuate across the water
Guren had halted the German advance for his bombers to finish off the British army
But he hadn't reckoned on the Spitfire
The RAF lost 900 planes
But 1400 Luftwaffe aircraft was stopped from reaching the beaches
Just as important the Spitfire pilots were learning valuable lessons
Oh god, it was important to get that experience and get that training to basically gear itself up for the fight. That was to come
Just six weeks after Dunkirk the Battle of Britain would transform the re s tarnished reputation
In the skies over southern England the pilots of Fighter Command went defeat the Luftwaffe and save Britain from invasion
But it was at Dunkirk that the RAF at first come of age
today
Squadron Leader, Jeffrey Stevenson's restored mark 1 Spitfire is on a special mission
For the first time in 77 years, it returns to the skies were he and his fellow pilots learned their trade
It was over the beaches of Dunkirk the pilots realized with the Spitfire they had a machine that could save the day
Who got the expeditionary force off the beachhead we did
One of those Spitfire pilots Tony Bartley who was in combat at Dunkirk was in no doubt as to who really did save the BEF
Who got him off fire command, let's not kid ourselves
Only now can we appreciate the crucial role this remarkable aircraft played in the evacuation of over 300,000 men
They call it the miracle of Dunkirk, yeah, it was a miracle and for those who did get home
the memories of that miracle
Remain with them
You're thinking about it all the time day in day out Dunkirk
He never goes away on
Her own
And we came back. It was a miracle of Dunkirk. We rose again from the ashes
Starting next Saturday at 7:00 following the roots of legend britain's ancient tracks with Tony Robinson
Next night retracing the footsteps of the daring POWs who fled the camp's the freedom trails of world war ii 'the great escapes